---
layout: post
title: KijiExpress Setup
categories: [userguides, express, devel]
tags : [express-ug]
version: devel
order : 2
description: Setup.
---
##DRAFT##

The setup for KijiExpress is described in [Getting Started](http://www.kiji.org/getstarted/#Installation).

The following sections go into a little more detail if you don't already have your system up and running.

### Prerequisites

#### JDK

Make sure you have the JDK: version 6 or later.

#### Build Tools

Maven is a software project build tool that can be easily configured to compile KijiExpress
Scala files into Java JARs. You can put off setting up Maven by running KijiExpress jobs
on the KijiExpress REPL, or by configuring the development environment of your choice to
pull in the appropriate Kiji dependencies.

Setup Maven as described in [Maven Users Center](http://maven.apache.org/users/index.html).
You should be able to create the example project and run it using Java.

To complete the Maven setup for KijiExpress:

* Incorporate KijiExpress in your maven `settings.xml` file:

* Create a maven project and update the `pom.xml` file to include the Kiji framework and KijiExpress:

    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.kiji.express</groupId>
      <artifactId>kiji-express</artifactId>
      <version>${express.version}</version>
      <scope>provided</scope>
    </dependency>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.kiji.framework</groupId>
      <artifactId>kiji-framework</artifactId>
      <version>${kiji.framework.version}</version>
      <scope>provided</scope>
    </dependency>

In the future, you will be able to generate a KijiExpress project using a maven
archetype, the same way you can for kiji-schema and kiji-mr:

       mvn archetype:generate -DarchetypeCatalog=https://repo.wibidata.com/artifactory/kiji-packages/archetype-catalog.xml

#### Kiji Bento

The Kiji package is called "Bento" after the Japanese style of serving boxed meals. Each
new version of the bento is named after food inspired by the bento, in alphabetical sequence.

Kiji runs on Hadoop and HBase.  If you do not already have a cluster with these
services, the Kiji BentoBox is a useful quickstart cluster on your local
machine that will let you try out the Kiji tools.

Download the Bento, move it to where you want it to live (typically `/opt`), expand it.
Unzip the archive with the command

    tar xzf <bento-archive-filename>

This will expand the bento in a directory named `kiji-bento-\<version\>/`.

### Set Up the KijiExpress Environment

Set `$KIJI_HOME` to the `kiji-bento-<version>` directory:

    export KIJI_HOME=/path/to/kiji-bento-<version>

Typically you’ll also want environment variables for other locations you will access frequently.
Change `PROJECT` to your project name:

* Project root: `PROJECT_HOME`
* Project Kiji instance: `KIJI=kiji://.env/project-name`
* Location of project libraries: `LIBS_DIR=${PROJECT_HOME}/???`
* Location of Kiji libraries: `KIJI_CLASSPATH="${LIBS_DIR}/*"`
* Location of your compiled Express jobs (based on typical Maven defaults):

        EXPRESS_JOB_ROOT=${PROJECT_HOME}/target/<PROJECT>-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT-release/<PROJECT>-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT

### Run the Bento

    cd <path/to/bento>
    source bin/kiji-env.sh
    bento start

### Install a Kiji Instance

Install Kiji system tables in HBase:

    kiji install --kiji=${KIJI}

Make sure you set your $KIJI variable in the "Setup the KijiExpress Environment" section above.

### Create Tables in your Kiji Instance

KijiSchema includes the functionality to create and manipulate Kiji tables. Use the
KijiSchema shell to perform the one-time task of generating tables for your project’s
input and output data. Follow these steps:

1. Create a data definition in the form of a DDL file to specify the schema of the tables
you want to create.

    Basically, you are creating tables with names, descriptions, row key format, and the
    locality group description with the families and columns that make up the table. The
    easiest way to do this is to copy one of the DDL files from a Kiji tutorial project
    and modify it to meet your needs. Find an example here:

        ${KIJI_HOME}/examples/express-music/src/main/resources/org/kiji/express/music/music-schema.ddl

    More detailed information about KijiSchema requirements and the DDL syntax is here:

        http://docs.kiji.org/userguides/schema/1.2.1/schema-shell-ddl-ref/

2. Run the DDL file against the project instance in the KijiSchema shell:

        kiji-schema-shell --kiji=${KIJI} --file=${PROJECT_HOME}/ddl/<schema>.ddl
