---
layout: post
title: What is KijiExpress?
categories: [userguides, express, devel]
tags : [express-ug]
version: devel
order : 1
description: Overview.
---
##DRAFT##

KijiExpress is a modeling environment designed to make defining data processing MapReduce
jobs quick and expressive, particularly for data stored in Kiji tables. One benefit of
KijiExpress is that a model implemented in KijiExpress is deployable in a production
enterprise software environment without needing to be redeveloped in Java.

>Note that not all of KijiExpress modeling functionality is implemented at this time.
>See [KijiExpress Roadmap](#kijiexpress_roadmap) for specifics.

Combined with KijiScoring, the KijiExpress model can return results in the time frames
demanded of user interactions in the web. The KijiExpress model lifecycle allows you to
manage all of the phases of generating and maintaining models and data to support an
application using machine learning to produce better results.

KijiExpress jobs are written in the Scala programming language, which gives you access to
Java libraries and tools but is more concise and easier to write. In addition, KijiExpress
gives you access to functionality for building complex MapReduce data pipelines by
including the Scalding library, a Twitter sponsored open-source library for authoring
flows of analytics-focused MapReduce jobs. KijiExpress is integrated with Avro to give
you access to complex records and data types in your data transformation pipelines.

## KijiExpress Roadmap

KijiExpress is an evolving project to provide a development environment for generating,
training, and verifying predictive models and to support data operations that allow real-time
application of the model to be as efficient as possible. The planned functionality of
KijiExpress will roll out over time. The core functionality that is currently available
provides developers with tools to manipulate data in pipelines that provide considerable
flexibility over trying to write MapReduce jobs directly in Java. Additional functionality
planned for KijiExpress includes support for a model lifecycle:

* **Preparation.**  KijiExpress model lifecycle includes the opportunity to execute offline
computations so results can be used when extracting features in real time. In production,
the prepare phase might be executed in batch on a periodic basis, to ensure its results
are up-to-date when extracting features.

* **Data Extraction.**  The extract phase transforms entity-centric raw data from the data
store about an entity into the features for that entity used by other model lifecycle phases.

* **Scoring.**  The score phase defines how an entity's data is combined with a trained
model to produce a score.

* **Training.**  The train phase executes offline procedures that generate data required
to score using the model. Training accepts features extracted for a subset of entities
(a training set) and uses them with the model and entity data to produce entity-specific
results.

* **Evaluate.**  After defining how a model is trained and used to score, it is necessary
to evaluate these procedures for accuracy. Often, this involves scoring against a subset
of entities different from the training set and evaluating the scores produced against
some known ground-truth.


These high-level modeling stages rely on data transformations and flow, from importing
data into Kiji tables from HDFS or other sources, to reading data from Kiji tables, to
performing operations on the data, to writing data out to Kiji tables. This document
describes the core functionality available now.

## Using this Document

This document describes how to set up your KijiExpress environment, how to write KijiExpress
jobs to read, write, and transform data, taking advantage of the complex record structures
supported by Kiji Express through AVRO data types. It describes running the jobs and
administrative tasks to help you be comfortable developing, debugging, and deploying
MapReduce jobs using KijiExpress.

## Useful External References

TBW
* Scala reference
* Scalding reference

## Other Kiji References

* KijiExpress uses Kiji Schema under the covers to create and use Kiji tables.
* ?reference to KijiExpress tutorial?