---
layout: post
title: PlayCount
categories: [tutorials, express-recommendation, 1.0.0]
tags: [express-music]
order: 5
description: A job that counts song plays.
---

<h3 style="margin-top:0px;padding-top:10px;">The 'Hello World!' of MapReduce</h3>

To quote Scalding Developers,
[Hadoop is a distributed system for counting words.](https://github.com/twitter/scalding)
Unfortunately we are fresh out of words, but we do have the play history of
bajillions of users listening to bazillions of songs.

This MapReduce job uses the listening history of our users that we have stored in the `users` Kiji
table to calculate the total number of times each song has been played. We then write the result of
this job to a text file in HDFS containing tab-separated values.

### Creating the Job

`SongPlayCounter` is an example of a KijiExpress job that reads from a Kiji table and writes to a
file on HDFS. SongPlayCounter proceeds through these stages:

* Read the column "info:track_plays" from rows in a Kiji table.
* Break each user's track play history into individual songs.
* Count the number of times each song has been played.
* Write each song ID and play count to a file in HDFS.

The tutorial includes the job already written for you in [Running the Job](#run-job) below; these sections
walk through how the job is created.

#### Read "info:track_plays" from a Kiji table

Data can be read from a Kiji table by using [`KijiInput`](({{site.api_express_1_0_0}}/KijiInput.html).
This factory method takes options specific to requesting slices of data from a Kiji table such as:

* Which columns to retrieve from the table and the field names they should be given.
* Number of versions of each cell to return.
* Filters to apply to the requested data.

For the tutorial, we call `KijiInput` to read all versions of the column "info:track_plays" from the
provided Kiji table and bind the resulting value to the field named `'playlist`:

{% highlight scala %}
  KijiInput.builder
      .withTableURI(args("table-uri"))
      .withColumnSpecs(
          QualifiedColumnInputSpec.builder
              .withColumn("info", "track_plays")
              .withMaxVersions(all)
              .build -> 'playlist
          )
      .build
{% endhighlight %}

Note the reference here to `args("table-uri")`, which evaluates to the value of the job-specific
command-line option `--table-uri` .

#### Split each user's track play history into individual songs

Each cell in the "info:track_plays" column for a given row may contain multiple cell versions, each
with a different timestamp.  The different versions of the "info:track_plays" contain the songs that
the corresponding user has listened to at different times.  KijiExpress returns the multiple
versions of a cell as a
[Scala Seq](http://www.scala-lang.org/api/current/index.html#scala.collection.Seq) of cells.

We now unpack the data contained within each cell:

{% highlight scala %}
/**
  * Gets the ids of songs a user has listened to.
  *
  * @param slice from the column `info:track_plays` that records all the songs a user has
  *     listened to.
  * @return the song ids that a user has listened to.
  */
def songsListenedTo(slice: Seq[FlowCell[CharSequence]]): Seq[String] = {
  slice.map { cell => cell.datum.toString }
}
{% endhighlight %}

The function `songsListenedTo` simply extracts all of the data (i.e., the track that the user has
listened to) from each cell.

We next invoke the the Scalding function `flatMapTo` on the unpacked stream of cells.  `flatMapTo`
is one of the set of
[Scalding map-like functions](https://github.com/twitter/scalding/wiki/Fields-based-API-Reference#wiki-map-functions),
which also include `flatMap`, `map`, and `mapTo`.  The tuples resulting from a `map` or `flatMap` operation
contain the same fields as the tuples the operation was run against, as well as the output fields
generated by the operation.  The results of `mapTo` and `flatMapTo` functions, however, contain only
the output fields generated by the operation; all fields from the input tuple are dropped.

Moreover, the Scalding `flatMapTo` function flattens the list that it produces, hence the output of
the following `flatMapTo` command is a pipe of tuples, each containing a single field, `'song`.

The following command extracts the cell data using `songsListenedTo` and flattens the results pipe
of lists of songs:

{% highlight scala %}
.flatMapTo('playlist -> 'song) { songsListenedTo }
{% endhighlight %}


#### Count the occurrences of each song

Now that we have separated each played song from the user that listened to it, we can calculate the
play count for each song. To do so, we will use the
[Scalding groupBy function](https://github.com/twitter/scalding/wiki/Fields-based-API-Reference#wiki-grouping-functions).
`groupBy` takes two arguments:

* A field (or fields) to group by
* A function that aggregates the resulting tuples that shared the same value bound to the provided
  field.

In our case we want to group on the song name, and then count the number of tuples for each unique
song name.  We shall then bind the number of tuples to the field `'songCount`:

{% highlight scala %}
.groupBy('song) { _.size('songCount) }
{% endhighlight %}

After this operation, the output pipe contains tuples with fields `'song` and `'songCount`.

#### Write the results to a file
Finally, we write the play counts to a TSV (tab-separated value) file on HDFS:

{% highlight scala %}
.write(Tsv(args("output")))
{% endhighlight %}

Note the reference here to `args("output")`, which evaluates to the value of the job-specific
command-line option `--output` .
#### All Together Now

This code shows the entire pipeline put together:

<div id="accordion-container">
  <h2 class="accordion-header"> SongPlayCounter.scala </h2>
  <div class="accordion-content">
    <script src="http://gist-it.appspot.com/github/kijiproject/kiji-express-music/raw/kiji-express-music-1.0.0/src/main/scala/org/kiji/express/music/SongPlayCounter.scala"> </script>
  </div>
</div>

### Running the Job<a id="run-job"> </a>

*  Run the SongPlayCounter job:

<div class="userinput">
{% highlight bash %}
express job --libjars "${MUSIC_EXPRESS_HOME}/lib/*" \
    ${MUSIC_EXPRESS_HOME}/lib/kiji-express-music-1.0.0.jar \
    org.kiji.express.music.SongPlayCounter \
    --table-uri ${KIJI}/users \
    --output express-tutorial/songcount-output \
    --hdfs
{% endhighlight %}
</div>

### Verify Output

*  Run the following command to see the output of the job:

<div class="userinput">
{% highlight bash %}
hadoop fs -tail express-tutorial/songcount-output/part-00000 | head -n 3
{% endhighlight %}
</div>

    song-0	260
    song-1	100
    song-10	272

